                                           DATE: 19 July 2008
                                           AUTHOR: David R. Cok
                                           COPYRIGHT: (c) 2007-2008 David Cok

This file describes a completely rewritten JML tool (called OpenJML) based
on the OpenJDK release of the Java tool set (http://openjdk.java.net).  It is
an extension of the GPL source available through OpenJDK.  The source code for
OpenJML is kept at sourceforge (see www.jmlspecs.org, 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/jmlspecs/, and
http://jmlspecs.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/jmlspecs/OpenJML/ ).

The OpenJML tool is a JML syntax and semantics checker.  It does not (at
present) do full runtime assertion checking or static reasoning, nor does it do
Java code generation.  Also, it is only a command-line tool and has no 
integration with any IDE.  It does intend to parse and check all aspects of JML 
as they are defined in the JML reference manual (cf. http://www.jmlspecs.org), 
though that is an ongoing project.

OpenJML has so far been developed and tested under Cygwin (and Java 1.6).
Comments on your experience on other platforms is welcome.

Your feedback regarding the value of this tool is welcome; please report any
difficulties or bugs, to jmlspecs-interest@lists.sourceforge.net or
jmlspecs-reloaded@lists.sourceforge.net or 
jmlspecs-developers@lists.sourceforge.net as appropriate.

As is the case for the OpenJDK code, the OpenJML tool is run with a 1.6
version of Java.  At present it cannot be run to check files against a set
of Java 1.4 libraries.

The various releases of the tool can be obtained from
http://jmlspecs.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/jmlspecs/OpenJML/releases
or directly from the Download section of the sourceforge page for the
jmlspecs project:  http://sourceforge.net/projects/jmlspecs .
The gzipped tar file containing a release of OpenJML contains
	openjml.jar
	jmlspecs.jar
	jmlruntime.jar
	README   (this file)

INSTALLATION:

To install OpenJML, simply gunzip and untar the distribution file into a 
directory of your choice (call it $OPENJML).  Then you can run the tool
using the command (your java installation must be version 1.6):

	java -jar $OPENJML/openjml.jar

That command alone will show you a list of Java and JML command-line options.
To run OpenJML on a specific set of files, you need to, in the conventional
manner, specify
	(optionally) the classpath to use, using the -classpath option 
	(optionally) the sourcepath to use, using the -sourcepath option
	(optionally) the specification files to use, using the -specs option
	the files to check, listed on the command-line by file name,
	       relative to the current working directory

A typical simple scenario might be:
	java -jar $OPENJML/openjml.jar -classpath . *.java


THE FILES:

      These are conventional Java files for which either
a) the Java files contain JML specifications directly, or
b) there are specification files on the specs path with names corresponding
to the Java files names (e.g. A.jml for A.java).  If you mix Java files and
specification files in the same directory, be careful of the precedence of
JML file suffixes.  The files on the command-line are given with absolute
path names or with paths relative to the current working directory.



THE SPECS PATH:  

    The openjml.jar contains an internal copy of some Java
library specification files.  By default those will be used, but you can
supply your own directories containing specifications for your own classes
using the -specs option.  For example:
	-specs ".;mySpecsDir;$OPENJML/jmlspecs.jar"
By default, the internal specs are appended to any specifications you 
provide (you can turn this off with -noInternalSpecs).  Also, if you do not
provide an explicit -specs option, the value of org.jmlspecs.specspath is
used, else the value of -sourcepath, else the value of -classpath, else the
value of java.class.path.

If you supply a value for the Java property org.jmlspecs.system.specs, that
path will be used in place of the internal system specs.

Typically, if you specify an explicit specs path, you will want to include
on that path any directory entries from the classpath that contain your own
source code and exclude 3rd party and system libraries.


THE CLASSPATH:

Just as when compiling source code with javac, the classpath lists
directories in which one can find the Java files (by fully-qualified file
name) that are referenced by the files that are being compiled.

Note that the OpenJML tool needs a few classes to be available to it at
runtime.  These are included in the openjml.jar and are appended to
the classpath automatically.  The same files are present in jmlruntime.jar,
in case it is desired to include them explicitly.  The internal files can
be excluded using the -noInternalRuntime option.


THE SOURCEPATH:

The sourcepath is not commonly used, but can be used to distinguish where
source (.java) files are to be found (the source path) and where class (.class)
files are to be found (the classpath).


THE jmlruntime.jar:

This contains some compiled classes that the OpenJML tool needs on the 
classpath.  These classes are included by appending them
to the user's classpath automatically, so normally the user need not be
concerned with this jar file.  If for some reason you use the -noInternalRuntime
option, you may need to include jmlruntime.jar on the classpath explicitly.


THE jmlspecs.jar:

This file contains a copy of the 1.6 JML system specs, such as they are.
This is by no means a complete set, and includes a number of unmodified files
from 1.4 (which, if referenced, may give errors related to type generics).
The system specs are also part of openjml.jar and are included automatically,
so in simple uses the user need not be concerned with jmlspecs.jar.  However
if you wish to alter the specs or supply your own, you may wish to make use
of the contents of this jar file.

STATUS OF THIS RELEASE

This release is alpha quality.  Barring bugs, a valid Java/JML file will be
parsed without errors, with at least these exceptions: 
- the .. token in array ranges must sometimes be preceded by whitespace 
        (e.g. a[0..5] is likely to fail); 
- name lookup and type checking for old constructs with a label; 
- JML comments may not be terminated by @+*/ ;  
- JML specs for anonymous classes are not read; 
- matching of specs from a spec file to the signature in a Java file is fragile 
        for generic methods.

Some JML constructs are merely skipped over by the parser, including at least: 
- model programs; 
- accessible, callable, captures clauses; 
- for suffix of constraint clauses; 
- only the first file of a specification sequence is used; 
- JML in javadoc comments is ignored, as are method specifications that follow 
        the method signature; 
- access modifiers on JML clauses are parsed but mostly ignored.

Typechecking is in place for most JML constructs.  Omissions include at least:
- accessible, callable, captures clauses; 
- in and maps clauses.

Although the -rac option is present, the implementation of runtime
assertion checking is rudimentary.  With -rac enabled, compiled output files
are produced that include some runtime checks, but no specification 
inheritance is implemented, nor are there runtime checks for binary files.

The -esc option is also present, but this is very partial and preliminary.

Your feedback and comments are welcome.


NOTES FOR DEVELOPERS

The following notes are for those who wish to inspect or work with the OpenJML
source.

The source code is hosted in the jmlspecs project at sourceforge, in a
subversion repository.  It is organized to be easily used within Eclipse.  

The OpenJML source consists of the OpenJML code itself, plus slight
modifications of the OpenJDK source.  OpenJDK comes from
https://openjdk.dev.java.net/svn/openjdk/jdk/trunk/langtools .
This source code did need to be modified somewhat (but my aim is to avoid and 
reduce the amount of such modification).  I've treated the original as "vendor" 
code and made modifications in the versions incorporated into OpenJML.  More on 
that below.  For now, just note that the OpenJML/trunk subdirectories hold the 
development stream for the OpenJML tool; the OpenJML/vendor subdirectories hold 
the original sources from the location indicated.

Note that OpenJML has been developed under Eclipse RUNNING IN A CYGWIN
ENVIRONMENT.  That is Eclipse is launched from a Cygwin shell, not from the
Windows desktop.  Though much can be done from the windows desktop, some things
(e.g. building and testing release packages) do not work in that environment.

There are two easy ways to obtain a copy of the source and use it in Eclipse: 
use Eclipse to download a copy, or download directly using svn and then attach
to the subversion working copy with Eclipse.

A) Using eclipse to create and attach to a working copy:

- Start eclipse in a workspace location of your choosing
- From the workbench, choose File->Import
- Under "Other", choose "Checkout projects from SVN"
- Choose "Create a new repository location"
- Insert the URL: https://jmlspecs.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/jmlspecs/OpenJML/trunk
- Select all three folders to be checked out (OpenJML, OpenJDK, FreeBoogie)
- Choose to check them out as projects
- Specify, if desired, a location to which to check out the projects
- Get a quick cup of coffee

B) You can create a SVN working copy outside of Eclipse with the following
steps:
- Choose a filesystem folder in which to place the working copy - create it
     if necessary and cd into it
- execute the command: svn checkout https://jmlspecs.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/jmlspecs/OpenJML/trunk
- within eclipse, select File->Import
- in the Import dialog, select General->Existing Projects into Workspace
- enter the root directory - the directory in which you did the checkout
- the three projects OpenJML, OpenJDK, FreeBoogie should appear in the list;
     leave them all selected, and press Finish

Either of these procedures leave you with three new projects in your workspace.

Building:  

The build procedure is straightforward and automatic for OpenJML and
OpenJDK.

Launch configurations:

There are two launch configurations saved as shared configurations.

1) "OpenJML JUnit tests": this configuration runs the JUnit tests.  Note that
it contains (on the Arguments tab of the configuration dialog) a VM
argument of -Dopenjml.eclipseProjectLocation=${project_loc:OpenJML} .  This
is needed so that the JUnit tests know where to find the internal specs and
runtime files.  If you create launch configurations for subsets of the JUnit
tests, you will need to be sure this VM definition is present in those as well.

2) "Make OpenJML Release" (under the External Tools menu): this runs a Makefile
that builds the release package from a working and compiled set of projects.
You may need to modify this configuration to identify the location of the
'make' executable in your environment.

Vendor branches:

The vendor branch OpenJML/vendor/OpenJDK contains an export
of the source of openjdk verbatim, for the 
revisions identified in the commit comments.  The intent
is to manage this vendor branch as described in the Subversion 
documentation.  This verbatim copy was copied into the trunk branch and
identified with the original revision number.  Then modifications to those
sources were made and committed within the trunk.  When new versions of 
OpenJDK are available they will be copied and committed into the
vendor branch; then the changes that have occurred in the vendor branch will be
merged into the trunk.  When the details of this merging procedure are worked out,
they will be described here. 

